+++
date = "2009-01-13T22:33:42.5036249-08:00"
draft = false
title = "DSLs: Ready for Prime-Time?"
aliases = [
	"/2009/01/14/Dsls+Ready+For+Prime-time.aspx"
]
categories = [
	".NET","C#","C++","Conferences","F#","Flash","Java/J2EE","Languages","LLVM","Parrot","Ruby","Visual Basic","Windows"
]
concepts = ["Languages"]
languages = ["C#", "C++", "F#", "Ruby", "Visual Basic"]
platforms = [".NET", "Java/J2EE", "LLVM", "Parrot", "Windows"]
 
+++
<p>Chris Sells, an acquaintance (and perhaps friend, when he's not picking on me for my Java leanings) of mine from my DevelopMentor days, has a habit of putting on a "DevCon" whenever a technology seems to have reached a certain maturity level. He did it with XML a few years ago, and ATL before that, both of which were pretty amazing events, filled with the sharpest guys in the subject, gathered into a single room to share ideas and shoot each others' pet theories full of holes.</p> <p>He's at it again, this time with DSLs; from <a href="http://www.sellsbrothers.com/news/showTopic.aspx?ixTopic=2232">the announcement on his blog</a>:</p> <blockquote> <p>Are you interested in presenting a 45-minute talk on some Domain Specific Language (DSL) related topic? It doesn't matter which platform or OS you're targeting. It also doesn't matter whether you're an author, a vendor, a professional speaker or a developer in the trenches (in fact, I tend to be biased toward the latter). We're after interesting and unique applications of DSL technology and if you're doing good work in that area, then I need you to <a href="mailto:csells@microsoft.com?subject=DSL%20DevCon%20Abstract%20Submission">send me a session topic and 2-4 sentence abstract along with a little bit about yourself</a>. <p>I'll be taking submissions 'til February 9th, 2009, but <a href="mailto:csells@microsoft.com?subject=DSL%20DevCon%20Abstract%20Submission">don't delay</a>. Passion and a burning story to tell count twice as much as anything else. <p>And don't be shy about spreading this announcement around! I've got good coverage in the .NET and Windows communities, but don't know very many folks in the Java or Unix or hardcore modeling worlds, so if you're in that world, let those guys know! Thanks. <p>The <a href="http://sellsbrothers.com/conference/">DSL DevCon</a> itself will be in Redmond, WA on the Microsoft campus April 16-17, 2009, right after <a href="http://www.langnetsymposium.com/">the Lang.NET conference</a>. Lang.NET will be focused on general-purpose languages, whereas the DSL DevCon will focus on domain-specific languages. The idea is that if you want to attend one or the other or both, that's totally fine. We'll have 2.5 days of Lang.NET on April 14-16 and then 1.5 days of DSL DevCon content. <p>Oh, and the cost for both conferences is the same: $0. <p>We're only accepting 150 attendees to either conference. Every one of the five previous DevCons have sold out, so when we open registration, you'll want to be quick about getting your name on the list.  <p><a href="mailto:csells@microsoft.com?subject=DSL%20DevCon%20Abstract%20Submission">Submit your DSL-related talk idea!</a></p></blockquote> <p>For those of you who are deep in the Java or Ruby space, I really urge you to take a chance here and come to the event--just because it's being held on the Microsoft campus doesn't mean you're going to be forcibly plugged into the Matrix; the same goes for the Lang.NET event in the earlier part of the week, too. Don't believe me? I have proof: Brian Goetz, John Rose, and Charlie Nutter, Sun employees all, attended last years Lang.NET event, talked about the JVM and JRuby, and not only did they <em>not</em> have to give up their "sun.com" email addresses, but they came away with some new appreciations for the CLR, the ecosystem there, and even a few insights about their own platform in comparison to the JVM. (I won't say this as an absolute fact, but I think a lot of John's work on method handles for Java7 came out of conversations he'd had with some of the CLR guys that week.)</p> <p>This is a DevCon, not a MarCon or a SaleCon. If you're a dev, you're welcome to come here. Frankly, I'd love to see the Java and Ruby (and LLVM and Parrot and ...) guys storm the castle, so to speak, if for no other reason than so Chris will stop teasing me about being a Java guy. ;-)</p>
 
