title=Synchronous Work, Asynchronous Work
date=2025-1-25
type=post
tags=management, engineering
status=draft
description=We often talk about teams working "remote" or "in office", but leaving the discussion at that level misses some critical points of analysis--namely, that the real distinction is between "synchronous" and "asynchronous" work.
~~~~~~

**tl;dr** Over the last two years, we've seen a dramatic policy debate playing out on the feeds of LinkedIn: "WFH (Work From Home) vs RTO (Return to Office)". Nearly everyone has an opinion, and many (if not most) of them are held strongly. Some are held based on data, some on personal preference, and many are based on personal experience. Nearly all of them, however, focus on the wrong part of the debate: it's not really about "WFH vs RTO", but about "async vs sync".

<!--more-->

Over the last five years, we've seen a remarkable transition/cycle in "work", thanks to the COVID-19 pandemic.

### Everybody go home! Don't come back! (But keep working!)
When the pandemic lockdown was imposed, nearly every company on the face of the planet "went remote", doing everything they could to enable their employees to work from home, partly out of a desire to keep their employees, but primarily out of a desire to keep the company going. And for the two-plus years of lockdown, it actually worked out remarkably well--certainly, some jobs were heavily affected since they couldn't be done remotely (looking at you, every assembly-line job ever), but overall, for our industry, the shift was relatively smooth and painless. We discovered that Zoom/Teams/Slack/Discord and other tools could be used with great effect, though not without pain, and software was written, tested, deployed, and debugged.

> Personal story: I was working for Rocket Mortgage at the time, and in the span of a week, the company went from the traditional "We expect all our employees to be physically present in our corporate office" (in Detroit, Michigan) the previous week to "We are monitoring the situation closely" on Monday to "Take your laptops home" (some of which hadn't left their laptop dock literally since the employee started working for the company one, three, or even ten-plus years earlier) by Friday. The Rocket IT team scrambled--successfully--to make sure that every single laptop could VPN in to the company network over a span of five days, and for the most part, the shift from "office" to "remote" was complete, at least at the technology level.

During the lockdown, loads of new social rules were quickly hammered out and then renegotiated as necessary. "Camera on" vs "camera off" became a nation-wide talking point for teams. Instituting a five-minute break between meetings for people to get up and take a bio break--even when there'd never been a perception of a need to do that with back-to-back meetings in different physical buildings--became a corporate policy. Suddenly, pets were welcomed "into" the (virtual) meetings.

And the world just laughed when we remembered the video of [a small girl joining her dad's BBC news report from home](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Mh4f9AYRCZY), because suddenly that was all of us, particularly those with kids. Suddenly, *every* day was "take your kid to work day"!

> Another personal note: Running the "Technology Culture" team at Rocket at the time, I was front-and-center on figuring out what the new "remote office" culture could/should be for the folks in technology. Not all the policies we created "stuck", and some definitely got adjusted as we stumbled along, but for the most part, it was a pretty successful culture shift. By the time I left, most of them had become habitual rather than enforced.

But more germane to this essay, several [studies](https://www.apollotechnical.com/working-from-home-productivity-statistics/) documented that WFH led to greater productivity. By 2022, the world seemed poised to enter the "next phase" of work, where all thanks to ubiquitous Internet access and telecommunication applications, all of us (or at least a significant number of us) would be working from home.

### Everybody come back! No, seriously!
Then, as the lockdown eased up, companies started to push back on the WFH approach, as we began to see the "missing parts" of working together physically in the same place. The toll of being "trapped" in one's domicile began to weigh more and more heavily on people, and even the most introverted of employees found their mental health took a hit from the lack of casual social contact. Businesses local to the office(s) found their revenue was highly tied to people being in the office, and many cities began a campaign to entice people back to the downtown areas to help get those downtown businesses back on their feet or on a more solid footing.

Recognizing that *some* time together in the same place/time is better than none, many companies began to explore "hybrid" options wherein an employee spends some percentage of their time in the office, the rest working from home. Some policies sought to give their employees flexibility in the matter, others lay down core numbers (3 days here, 2 days there) by fiat. Meanwhile, some academic [studies](https://www.forbes.com/sites/benjaminlaker/2023/08/02/working-from-home-leads-to-decreased-productivity-research-suggests/) suggested that there might be objective reasons working from an office was more productive, though most critics of those studies quickly pointed out flaws in the study or in the lack of peer review (which, to be fair, was also true of the pro-WFH studies, too).

By 2023 and 2024, "return to office" mandates became more common, none more severe than Amazon's "everybody is back in the office five days a week" policy (re)introduced in late 2024. While some employees welcomed the return, many also balked, particularly since there seemed no credible reason for it. That in turn led corporate conspiracy theorists claimed it was because corporate building leases had to be justified, or that this was a filter designed to get people to "quiet quit" or as a test of loyalty.

### My own thoughts
Though weighing in with my own thoughts on the debate isn't the point of this essay, there's still an inherent elephant in the room that needs to be addressed. If you don't care to hear my opinions, feel free to skip this section, but for those who are curious, let me lay down a few things that are facts, assumptions, or that I take to be axioms of this whole thing:

* **You will never get everybody under one roof.** Let's face it, companies of any size larger than a startup are global affairs. You might have a good chunk of your people in one place, but there will always be salespeople out on the road, DevRel advocates at conferences, and the CEO (and CTO and others) out schmoozing at cocktail parties in posh places like Paris or San Jose. The bare-metal idea that "We all need to get into the same room" is kinda ludicrous even on the very surface of it.
* **We don't need everybody in the same room, just the people who work together.** This is usually the next realization/justification. But even then, see the above bullet point: You probably won't even get everybody on the same team together, because sometimes the best talent you can get isn't in your home town, particularly if you don't live in New York, Seattle, or San Jose. Sometimes, the company lives in [Warsaw, Indiana](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Warsaw,_Indiana) (home to a software company, I'm serious, they [do crop insurance](https://silveuscropins.com/technology/)).
* **Coming all the way in to the office to put on headphones and be in Zoom meetings is ridiculous.** (That one kinda just doesn't need explanation, I don't think.)
* **It is absolutely possible to lead a team or a department well while also remotely.** I've done it--I built a team-of-teams literally from nothing at the start of the pandemic to a department of 30 people all entirely remotely, and it was one of the closest groups I think I've ever been a part of. Many of the people in that group are still in touch with me and each other, five years (and several job-hops) later. (Odd note: Some of the people I hired, I *still* haven't actually met in person yet.)
* **Running a team remotely is a skill.** It takes a very different mindset and a different set of tools. Some managers are prepared to work with those tools, some aren't. Most (all) can learn them, so it seems to me that some just choose not to.
* **We have no standardized metric for "productivity".** Seriously. The various academic studies are all over the map on this, measuring anything from "time spent on the laptop" to "keystrokes recorded" to "amount of work submitted". In some cases, the studies abandoned any objective notion of "productivity" in favor of "preference", which is remarkably un-scientific: I may *prefer* something that is less productive, and I may *prefer* things that are more productive, but my preferences are really a terrible measurement when considering options (with one exception, and that's--literally--employee contentment). Until we can get some kind of objective measurement of "productivity", we often end up arguing past each other as we each cite studies that seem to defend our intuition going into the debate.
* **Some work happens more smoothly together, while some work happens more smoothly alone.** Doing a brainstorm on a software design is still best done clustered around a whiteboard--I haven't found any online tool that's anywhere near as smooth as taking over a conference room with whiteboards, sticky notes, and pens. Sitting at your computer writing code, however, is definitely something that is best done without others around, unless you're pairing (which is actually quite doable--if not arguably better--over Zoom/Teams/etc).
* **Most meetings can be done remotely.** If the meeting doesn't require me handing you something (physically, and a printed copy of a Word file doesn't count), then it can be a Zoom/Teams thing.
* **Relationships deepen with physical, in-person time.** There is still no substitute for the experience of breaking bread together. I doubt there will be.
* **Ad-hoc conversations are, still, difficult to enable remotely.** Others can't overhear what two people on the team are discussing, and those sorts of overheard conversations are sometimes what leads to incredibly deep insights. Even the simple chair-swivel-"Hey can I bother you" kinds of conversations are difficult to replicate remotely.

If it's not clear by now, I ride the fence a little here, but only a little--I think WFH is a powerful tool/option, and frankly, I think a great deal of software development work can/should be done from home in order to obtain the lack-of-overhead (that is to say, commute time and costs) that WFH enables. I also think that several acts of software development benefit from being in person, and that it's useful for team members to spend time in one another's presence as a bonding activity. All together, I suppose it plants me firmly in the "hybrid" part of the spectrum, which is pretty consistent for me dating back to before the pandemic--long before COVID, when working (sometimes locally, sometimes remotely) as an independent consultant, I often looked to go (flying out if necessary) to the company/client to have periodic meetings in person, for all the reasons I just cited. But I also found that trying to work every day in the office was distracting and often counterproductive.

Meanwhile, the debate rages on, probably continuing to do so for the remainder of this decade, if not longer. What I find most tragic about the whole discussion, though, is my belief that most of the debate is over the wrong thing: *it isn't about **where you do the work**, it's about **how the work gets done**.* In particular, differentiating between synchronous and asynchronous work, and attaching the right kind of each to a particular problem, helps eliminate much of the ambiguity as to which (WFH or RTO) is more "productive" and allows teams to maximize their use of each.

### Organization design and distributed systems


### Sync vs async work


