title=Every Company Needs a Developer Relations Team 
date=2022-12-31
type=post
tags=devrel
status=published
description=Why your company needs a DevRel team--regardless of what your company does--and how DevRel matches up to the company's needs.
~~~~~~

**tl;dr**: In my [2022 Tech Predictions](../2022/2022-tech-predictions.html), I asserted that more companies would be building DevRel teams, and I've repeated that in my [2023 Tech Predictions](../2023/2023-tech-predictions.html). I have reasons for that; I've been at many wildly-different companies, many of which with wildly different business models, and I've concluded that every company (that is in any way associated with software beyond a cursory level) in the post-2000 era has need of a Developer Relations department or organization. That said, DevRel is not the same at every company, and varies with the kind of things the company does to make money.

<!--more-->

These are bold words, and often generate reactions ranging from quizzical to "are you trying to sell me something?". I stand by them, though, because *every company in the post-2000 era that does something with software--whether they buy it, use it, or build it--engages with developers in some way, and therefore needs to relate to them.*

If you're still willing to hear me out, let's revisit my definition of Developer Relations:

> That part of the company that engages with developers, both internal and external to the company, for the purpose of using that relationship for net gain. This can take the form of many things, but ultimately, (a) it's aimed at developers, (b) it's intended to facilitate greater positivity to one or both sides, and (c) it centers around developer activities of one form or another (that is, it could be technical, "human skill", or process, but it kinda-sorta has to be around the world of software development).

Let's also consider a simple categorization of companies, according to my own (very biased) experience and perspective:

* **Developer-facing product companies.** Your Microsofts, Googles, JetBrains, and so on. These companies make and sell products that are sold directly to developers, making them the target audience and the source of interest and income for the company. These are the ones that pioneered the Developer Relations concept, and for that reason, these are often the companies that come to mind when thinking about DevRel. [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Developer_relations) calls these "Developer-First" companies, and says they have a "Business-to-Developer" (**B2D**) business model. This makes sense, although I think there's still value in thinking in terms of companies buying the developer-centric product, as opposed to developers buying it for themselves. (But maybe that's splitting hairs.)

* **Product companies where developers "value-add" indirectly.** These are companies Consider, for a moment, one of my previous employers, [Smartsheet](https://www.smartsheet.com/). This is a product that does not sell directly to developers--in fact, it often finds itself in categories where professional developers are explicitly not allowed or desired (e.g., "low code" tools or "citizen developer" products). Wikipedia thinks of these as "Developer-Plus" companies, and thinks of them as business-to-business (**B2B**) or business-to-consumer (**B2C**) models, and says "While the primary focus of Developer-Plus companies is to create and sell products for businesses or consumers, they also make products or services available to developers which benefit or enhance their strategy including: opening new market channels, creating new use cases, contributing to innovation strategies, or optimizing/enhancing existing products."

* **Companies where integration is a key core of the business.** [Rocket Mortgage](https://www.rocketmortgage.com) would fit this definition, since much of their ability to sell mortgages (which is clearly a non-developer-facing product!) depends on their ability to integrate with the other various financial players out in the world. Consumers won't see code, they won't touch code, but the value of the product will definitely grow (or shrink) depending on developers' ability to connect "our stuff to other peoples' stuff" (such as banks, escrow companies, title companies, credit organizations, and so on). It could be argued that this is more "Developer-Plus", but we're starting to stretch the definitions some here; for some companies, being able to provide integration capabilities is "table stakes" and means the difference between a partnership or sale and a waste of salespeoples' time.

* **Consulting companies.** This is its own category primarily because there's so many of them, and they all have the same basic goal: Sell *their* developers to companies that either don't have developers, don't have enough developers, or don't have the right developers. The company's core business model is in putting their smart developer people to work for you, regardless of what sort of developer people you already have--either in conjunction with your smart developer people, or as a complement to your overworked developer people, or as leaders to your less-smart developer people, and so on.

Each of these companies needs a DevRel team, but for different reasons:

* **Developer-facing product companies.** Pretty clearly the DevRel team's job here is a combination of marketing,sales (technical pre-sales, actually), and engineering:

    * *Marketing*: Brand recognition (getting them to understand that the product exists), product-fit awareness (having enough knowledge what the product does to be able to judge if it's worth exploring for a given problem), and getting them to try the product.
    * *Sales*: Working with developers to get past any obstacles they may have to buying the product, such as overcoming concerns about compatibility with other products, or the product's applicability for use in various scenarios, and so on. (If you're not sure this is really a DevRel role, consider how many blog posts and/or presentations you've seen describing how Vendor Product X works in Vendor Cloud A or with Vendor Database G.)
    * *Engineering*: Providing developer support if/when the product doesn't execute as expected, or there's unexpected outcomes, or unanticipated obstacles, and so on, as well as providing examples for developers to follow so that their onboarding with the product is easier.

    For the most part, these are pretty self-descriptive, and I doubt most developer-types reading this would disagree strongly with this characterization.

* **Consulting companies.** The consulting company needs DevRel because consulting companies that cannot convince potential clients of the consulting company's technical skills and apititude don't stay in business for very long. We are smart consultants! Your company needs us! Thus, the consulting company's DevRel team needs to:

    * *Marketing*: For a consulting company, marketing here really means **brand recognition** ("We are smart people! Doing smart things!"), so that clients will already know about the company--and how smart their people are--by the time a salesperson connects with the potential client. [ThoughtWorks](https://www.thoughtworks.com/), for example, coasted for the better part of a decade on the various activities of its Principal Scientist, Martin Fowler, who brought incomparable amounts of brand recognition to the company's name and brand. After a while, others at the company began doing some of their own brand recognition efforts, but Martin clearly was the cornerstone of the company's brand efforts for quite some time.
    * *Sales*: Most of the time, when a consulting company is looking to sell their services to a client, the client needs to be sure of a couple of things: one, that these people are not only smart about technology, but also about the kinds of problems the client is facing; two, that these people can work well with the client's people to get the project done; and three, that the consulting company has some success under its belt, such that this feels like a "good bet". In these situations, it helps immensely to have one of the developer-types be in the room during the conversation, to speak (as a reasonable proxy) to the skills of the consultancy and offer up some examples of when/where the consultancy was able to succeed.
    * *Engineering*: Coming back around to the "bidirectional" nature of DevRel, in a consulting organization the DevRel team should be talking to your consultants (and their clients) to get a sense of what sorts of problems are being found routinely at a variety of different clients, so that your consulting company as a whole can be thinking about how to gain a competitive advantage over other companies by building reusable assets that can accelerate the teams' productivity across both current and future clients. (Not doing that? Maybe you should be!) At the very least, the DevRel team can be serving as an incubator for the use of new languages and platforms to that same purpose.

    * *Recruiting*: In many consultancies, the best source of consultants is through the same venues and activities that DevRel engages--so consultants are encouraged to do those activities as a recruiting effort.

    Note that in most consultancies, the current DevRel activities are generally done by the consultants themselves--Principals, Software Architects, senior consultants, and so on--but very, very few consultancies actually accept that this is a role in its own right, and most senior consultants who do this work do so during their non-billable time. In fact, even though most consultancies accept that Sales and Marketing are both activities that require being outside the umbrella of "billable hours", anything that requires technical skills means those Sales and Marketing folks have to beg time from consultants--who are in turn now caught on the horns of the "If I do this it's non-billable time, and my end-of-year bonus is tied directly to my billable time percentage, so either I sacrifice my bonus or I'm doing it off-the-clock as a volunteer effort."

    > ***NOTE:*** If you're a consultancy, stop doing this! Or, rather, consider how much more effective your company could be at finding and placing consultants if the people doing it were doing it full-time, just as your Sales and Marketing folks are. Not to mention the opportunities it gives you to rotate consultants through this team so that they get some experience doing something other than code--it helps grow the company in a variety of ways.

* **Product companies where developers "value-add" indirectly.** These companies don't sell to developers, and in many cases, aren't even in the "tech business" at all; think about Netflix or Hulu for a moment. They sell video streaming, which is obviously technology, but they don't *sell* to developers--they have no offering that a developer or development team can purchase. Yet, Netflix is commonly considered to be one of the FAANG companies, where Hulu--whose business model is *exactly the same*--is not. The key difference is because Netflix chose to put some effort into the OSS community. Why do this? Netflix offers an API that allows people to build "value-add" using the Netflix platform; quick challenge, without Googling, does Hulu have an API? ([Hint](https://flixed.io/hulu-api-for-developers/)) And hey, while we're at it, what about Ford? You know, the cars? Do they have a public API? ([Hint](https://developer.ford.com/))

    If you can think of a company that's larger than a thousand people in size, there's a good (better than 50%) chance that that company has an API. Even a [soft drink manufacturer](https://rapidapi.com/blog/directory/coca-cola-enterprises/) has an API. Chances are strong that your executive team has been looking for ways to turn your company into a "tech company" and provide a "platform" for people to build with. (By the way, most executives have no idea what that platform should be or look like, they only know they need one. [Talk to me](mailto:ted@tedneward.com) if you're an executive and want to figure out what one for your company should look like and provide.) Even if you're not looking to build a public API, chances are even stronger that you're building a private one--which means you need a DevRel team.

    * *Marketing*: If you're doing a public API, you want developers to know that this API exists, even if they don't directly have access to it, because it creates credibility around your efforts when partners and/or paying customers want to use it. If you're doing a private API, your efforts might actually be more internally-focused, the "inner source" model, where your efforts are now more about making other people inside the company aware of the API and what it does. (One of the best reasons to inner-source? So that other teams don't waste time and effort duplicating the API!)
    * *Sales*: Sales is about convincing people to use your product; in an external-facing API, some technical type will likely need to sit with potential partners and customers for your paying API, answering questions and exploring challenges and/or obstacles regarding the purchase of the API. For internal APIs, there's less pressure "to buy", but not by much--different teams will need to know that an inner-source API can do what they need, and there's likely to be just as much negotiation at work, for example over which team will add missing functionality or be responsible for added features when they need fixes and such. Having a DevReal team to take on some of that work can be invaluable.
    * *Engineering*: Speaking of fixes, if your public API is now a part of a financial contract, then the partner or customer has to have somebody to call in the event that something doesn't work right (or doesn't work the way they think is right). In developer product companies, they're very quick to spin up a technical support team, but for non-developer product companies, where does that tech support team sit? Right there in the DevRel team, if you ask me--particularly if the engineering effort to build out the APIs is scattered across several organizations internally.
    * *Recruiting*: Same story as the consulting DevRel team, really: If Ford wants to attract new developers, it helps to have some caché to do it, and that comes from being out in the world doing interesting things where developers can see them. Once again, that's the realm of a DevRel team.

* **Companies where integration is a key core of the business.** You're not Ford, you're a bank or some form of B2B business, where the company's main line of product requires integration to work or optimize. For example, if the business is a restaurant chain, developers can make use of APIs to automate the supply chain, tying the restaurant's inventory to orders, for example.  
* **Companies where integration is a key core of the business.** A lot more companies are in this bucket than you might imagine--airlines, for example, are always looking at various other systems they want or need to integrate with, starting with other airlines (as they share loyalty programs, for example), rental car companies, hotel chains, and other players in the travel industry. 

    * *Marketing*:
    * *Sales*:
    * *Engineering*:

Now, keep in mind that when I talk about the role of *developer relations*, I'm not just speaking of the activities of *developer advocates*; a modern DevRel team will have a variety of different folks on a DevRel team, and in many cases those activities will be different for the different roles on the team. DevAds will often go and speak at conferences, for example, whereas Technical Community Managers will be taking more of the social media management on themselves, while Technical Content Engineers will be focusing on content creation (such as documentation, videos, and so on), and Developer Support Engineers will be the first line of support for external developers, and so on. These roles overlap, to be sure, but it's the rare case where one person will do *everything*. (Frankly, those cases should probably be reserved for those companies that are just getting started and ned somebody to kick things off in the DevRel space--just like the startup's technical co-founder writes the code, builds the website, manages the bugs, and so on. Over time, you need to scale up and out, and that means more people.)
