title=2010 Tech Predictions
date=2010-01-05
type=post
tags=predictions
status=published
description=Technology and related predictions for 2010.
~~~~~~
Here we go again: the annual review of last year's predictions, and a set of new ones for the new year.

<!--more-->

<p>Here we go again—another year, another set of predictions revisited and offered up for the next 12 months. And maybe, if I'm feeling really ambitious, I'll take that shot I thought about last year and try predicting for the decade. Without further ado, I'll go back and revisit, unedited, my predictions for 2009 (&quot;<strong>THEN</strong>&quot;), and pontificate on those subjects for 2010 before adding any new material/topics. Just for convenience, <a href="http://blogs.tedneward.com/2009/2009-tech-predictions.html" target="_blank">here's a link back to last years' predictions</a>.</p>  <p>Last year's predictions went something like this (complete with basketball-scoring):</p>  <ul>   <li><strong>THEN: </strong>&quot;Cloud&quot; will become the next &quot;ESB&quot; or &quot;SOA&quot;, in that it will be something that everybody will talk about, but few will understand and even fewer will do anything with. (Considering the widespread disparity in the definition of the term, this seems like a no-brainer.) <strong>NOW:</strong> Oh, yeah. Straight up. I get two points for this one. Does <em>anyone</em> have a working definition of &quot;cloud&quot; that applies to all of the major vendors' implementations? <em>Ted, 2; Wrongness, 0</em>.</li>    <li><strong>THEN: </strong>Interest in Scala will continue to rise, as will the number of detractors who point out that Scala is too hard to learn. <strong>NOW:</strong> Two points for this one, too. Not a hard one, mind you, but one of those &quot;pass-and-shoot&quot; jumpers from twelve feet out. James Strachan even tweeted about this earlier today, pointing out this comparison. As more Java developers who think of themselves as smart people try to pick up Scala and fail, the numbers of sour grapes responses like &quot;Scala's too complex, and who needs that functional stuff anyway?&quot; will continue to rise in 2010. <em>Ted, 4; Wrongness, 0</em>.</li>    <li><strong>THEN</strong>: Interest in F# will continue to rise, as will the number of detractors who point out that F# is too hard to learn. (Hey, the two really are cousins, and the fortunes of one will serve as a pretty good indication of the fortunes of the other, and both really seem to be on the same arc right now.) <strong>NOW:</strong> Interestingly enough, I haven't heard as many F# detractors as Scala detractors, possibly because I think F# hasn't really reached the masses of .NET developers the way that Scala has managed to find its way in front of Java developers. I think that'll change mighty quickly in 2010, though, once VS 2010 hits the streets. <em>Ted, 4; Wrongness 2</em>.</li>    <li><strong>THEN</strong><em>:</em> Interest in all kinds of functional languages will continue to rise, and more than one person will take a hint from Bob &quot;crazybob&quot; Lee and liken functional programming to AOP, for good and for ill. People who took classes on Haskell in college will find themselves reaching for their old college textbooks again. <strong>NOW:</strong> Yep, I'm claiming two points on this one, if only because a bunch of Haskell books shipped this year, and they'll be the last to do so for about five years after this. (By the way, does anybody still remember aspects?) But I'm going the opposite way with this one now; yes, there's Haskell, and yes, there's Erlang, and yes, there's a lot of other functional languages out there, but who cares? They're hard to learn, they don't always translate well to other languages, and developers want languages that work on the platform they use on a daily basis, and that means F# and Scala or Clojure, or its simply not an option. <em>Ted 6; Wrongness 2</em>.</li>    <li><strong>THEN</strong><em>:</em> The iPhone is going to be hailed as &quot;the enterprise development platform of the future&quot;, and companies will be rolling out apps to it. Look for Quicken iPhone edition, PowerPoint and/or Keynote iPhone edition, along with connectors to hook the iPhone up to a presentation device, and (I'll bet) a World of Warcraft iPhone client (legit or otherwise). iPhone is the new hotness in the mobile space, and people will flock to it madly. <strong>NOW:</strong> Two more points, but let's be honest—this was a fast-break layup, no work required on my part. <em>Ted 8; Wrongness 2.</em></li>    <li><strong>THEN</strong>: Another Oslo CTP will come out, and it will bear only a superficial resemblance to the one that came out in October at PDC. Betting on Oslo right now is a fools' bet, not because of any inherent weakness in the technology, but just because it's way too early in the cycle to be thinking about for anything vaguely resembling production code. <strong>NOW:</strong> If you've worked at all with Oslo, you might argue with me, but I'm still taking my two points. The two CTPs were pretty different in a number of ways. <em>Ted 10; Wrongness 2.</em></li>    <li><strong>THEN</strong>: The IronPython and IronRuby teams will find some serious versioning issues as they try to manage the DLR versioning story between themselves and the CLR as a whole. An initial hack will result, which will be codified into a standard practice when .NET 4.0 ships. Then the next release of IPy or IRb will have to try and slip around its restrictions in 2010/2011. By 2012, IPy and IRb will have to be shipping as part of Visual Studio just to put the releases back into lockstep with one another (and the rest of the .NET universe). <strong>NOW:</strong> Pressure is still building. Let's see what happens by the time VS 2010 ships, and then see what the IPy/IRb teams start to do to adjust to the versioning issues that arise. <em>Ted 8; Wrongness 2.</em></li>    <li><strong>THEN</strong>: The death of JSR-277 will spark an uprising among the two leading groups hoping to foist it off on the Java community--OSGi and Maven--while the rest of the Java world will breathe a huge sigh of relief and look to see what &quot;modularity&quot; means in Java 7. Some of the alpha geeks in Java will start using--if not building--JDK 7 builds just to get a heads-up on its impact, and be quietly surprised and, I dare say, perhaps even pleased. <strong>NOW:</strong> Ah, Ted, you really should never underestimate the community's willingness to take a bad idea, strip all the goodness out of it, and then cycle it back into the mix as something completely different yet somehow just as dangerous and crazy. I give you Project Jigsaw. <em>Ted 10; Wrongness 2;</em></li>    <li><strong>THEN</strong>: The invokedynamic JSR will leapfrog in importance to the top of the list. <strong>NOW:</strong> The invokedynamic JSR begat interest in other languages on the JVM. The interest in other languages on the JVM begat the need to start thinking about how to support them in the Java libraries. The need to start thinking about supporting those languages begat a &quot;Holy sh*t moment&quot; somewhere inside Sun and led them to (re-)propose closures for JDK 7. And in local sports news, Ted notched up two more points on the scoreboard. <em>Ted 12; Wrongness 2.</em></li>    <li><strong>THEN</strong>: Another Windows 7 CTP will come out, and it will spawn huge media interest that will eventually be remembered as Microsoft promises, that will eventually be remembered as Microsoft guarantees, that will eventually be remembered as Microsoft FUD and &quot;promising much, delivering little&quot;. Microsoft ain't always at fault for the inflated expectations people have--sometimes, yes, perhaps even a lot of times, but not always. <strong>NOW:</strong> And then, just when the game started to turn into a runaway, airballs started to fly. The Windows7 release shipped, and contrary to what I expected, the general response to it was pretty warm. Yes, there were a few issues that emerged, but overall the media liked it, the masses liked it, and Microsoft seemed to have dodged a bullet. <em>Ted 12; Wrongness 5.</em></li>    <li><strong>THEN</strong>: Apple will begin to legally threaten the clone market again, except this time somebody's going to get the DOJ involved. (Yes, this is the iPhone/iTunes prediction from last year, carrying over. I still expect this to happen.) <strong>NOW:</strong> What clones? The only people trying to clone Macs are those who are building Hackintosh machines, and Apple can't sue them so long as they're using licensed copies of Mac OS X (as far as I know). Which has never stopped them from trying, mind you, and I still think Steve has some part of his brain whispering to him at night, calculating all the hardware sales lost to Hackintosh netbooks out there. But in any event, that's another shot missed. <em>Ted 12; Wrongness 7.</em></li>    <li><strong>THEN</strong>: Alpha-geek developers will start creating their own languages (even if they're obscure or bizarre ones like Shakespeare or Ook#) just to have that listed on their resume as the DSL/custom language buzz continues to build. <strong>NOW:</strong> I give you Ioke. If I'd extended this to include outdated CPU interpreters, I'd have made that three-pointer from half-court instead of just the top of the key. <em>Ted 14; Wrongness 7.</em></li>    <li><strong>THEN</strong>: Roy Fielding will officially disown most of the &quot;REST&quot;ful authors and software packages available. Nobody will care--or worse, somebody looking to make a name for themselves will proclaim that Roy &quot;doesn't really understand REST&quot;. And they'll be right--Roy doesn't understand what <em>they</em> consider to be REST, and the fact that he created the term will be of no importance anymore. Being &quot;REST&quot;ful will equate to &quot;I did it myself!&quot;, complete with expectations of a gold star and a lollipop. <strong>NOW:</strong> Does anybody in the REST community care what Roy Fielding wrote way back when? I keep seeing &quot;REST&quot;ful systems that seem to have designers who've never heard of Roy, or his thesis. Roy hasn't officially disowned them, but damn if he doesn't seem close to it. Still.... No points. <em>Ted 14; Wrongness 9.</em></li>    <li><strong>THEN</strong>: The Parrot guys will make at least one more minor point release. Nobody will notice or care, except for a few doggedly stubborn Perl hackers. They will find themselves having nightmares of previous lives carrying around OS/2 books and Amiga paraphernalia. Perl 6 will celebrate it's seventh... or is it eighth?... anniversary of being announced, and nobody will notice. <strong>NOW:</strong> Does anybody still follow Perl 6 development? Has the spec even been written yet? Google on &quot;Perl 6 release&quot;, and you get varying reports: &quot;It'll ship 'when it's ready'&quot;, &quot;There are no such dates because this isn't a commericially-backed effort&quot;, and &quot;Spring 2010&quot;. Swish—nothin' but net. <em>Ted 16; Wrongness 9.</em></li>    <li><strong>THEN</strong>: The debate around &quot;Scrum Certification&quot; will rise to a fever pitch as short-sighted money-tight companies start looking for reasons to cut costs and either buy into agile at a superficial level and watch it fail, or start looking to cut the agilists from their company in order to replace them with cheaper labor. <strong>NOW:</strong> Agile has become another adjective meaning &quot;best practices&quot;, and as such, has essentially lost its meaning. Just ask Scott Bellware. <em>Ted 18; Wrongness 9.</em></li>    <li><strong>THEN</strong>: Adobe will continue to make Flex and AIR look more like C# and the CLR even as Microsoft tries to make Silverlight look more like Flash and AIR. Web designers will now get to experience the same fun that back-end web developers have enjoyed for near-on a decade, as shops begin to artificially partition themselves up as either &quot;Flash&quot; shops or &quot;Silverlight&quot; shops. <strong>NOW:</strong> Not sure how to score this one—I haven't seen the explicit partitioning happen yet, but the two environments definitely still seem to be looking to start tromping on each others' turf, particularly when we look at the rapid releases coming from the Silverlight team. <em>Ted 16; Wrongness 11.</em></li>    <li><strong>THEN</strong>: Gartner will still come knocking, looking to hire me for outrageous sums of money to do nothing but blog and wax prophetic. <strong>NOW:</strong> Still no job offers. Damn. Ah, well. <em>Ted 16; Wrongness 13.</em></li> </ul>  <p>A close game. Could've gone either way. *shrug* Ah, well. It was silly to try and score it in basketball metaphor, anyway—that's the last time I watch ESPN before writing this.</p>  <p>For 2010, I predict....</p>  <ul>   <li><em>... I will offer 3- and 4-day training classes on F# and Scala, among other things.</em> OK, that's not fair—yes, I have the materials, I just need to work out locations and times. Contact me if you're interested in a private class, by the way.</li>    <li><em>... I will publish two books, one on F# and one on Scala.</em> OK, OK, another plug. Or, rather, more of a resolution. One will be the &quot;Professional F#&quot; I'm doing for Wiley/Wrox, the other isn't yet finalized. But it'll either be published through a publisher, or self-published, by JavaOne 2010.</li>    <li><em>... DSLs will either &quot;succeed&quot; this year, or begin the short slide into the dustbin of obscure programming ideas.</em> Domain-specific language advocates have to put up some kind of strawman for developers to learn from and poke at, or the whole concept will just fade away. Martin's book will help, if it ships this year, but even that might not be enough to generate interest if it doesn't have some kind of large-scale applicability in it. Patterns and refactoring and enterprise containers all had a huge advantage in that developers could see pretty easily what the problem was they solved; DSLs haven't made that clear yet.</li>    <li><em>... functional languages will start to see a backlash.</em> I hate to say it, but &quot;getting&quot; the functional mindset is hard, and there's precious few resources that are making it easy for mainstream (read: O-O) developers make that adjustment, far fewer than there was during the procedural-to-object shift. If the functional community doesn't want to become mainstream, then mainstream developers will find ways to take functional's most compelling gateway use-case (parallel/concurrent programming) and find a way to &quot;git 'er done&quot; in the traditional O-O approach, probably through software transactional memory, and functional languages like Haskell and Erlang will be relegated to the &quot;What Might Have Been&quot; of computer science history. Not sure what I mean? Try this: walk into a functional language forum, and ask what a monad is. Nobody yet has been able to produce an answer that doesn't involve math theory, or that does involve a practical domain-object-based example. In fact, nobody has really said why (or if) monads are even still useful. Or catamorphisms. Or any of the other dime-store words that the functional community likes to toss around.</li>    <li><em>... Visual Studio 2010 will ship on time, and be one of the buggiest and/or slowest releases in its history.</em> I hate to make this prediction, because I really don't want to be right, but there's just so much happening in the Visual Studio refactoring effort that it makes me incredibly nervous. Widespread adoption of VS2010 will wait until SP1 at the earliest. In fact....</li>    <li><em>... Visual Studio 2010 SP 1 will ship within three months of the final product.</em> Microsoft knows that people wait until SP 1 to think about upgrading, so they'll just plan for an eager SP 1 release, and hope that managers will be too hung over from the New Year (still) to notice that the necessary shakeout time hasn't happened.</li>    <li><em>... Apple will ship a tablet with multi-touch on it, and it will flop horribly.</em> Not sure why I think this, but I just don't think the multi-touch paradigm that Apple has cooked up for the iPhone will carry over to a tablet/laptop device. That won't stop them from shipping it, and it won't stop Apple fan-boiz from buying it, but that's about where the interest will end.</li>    <li><em>... JDK 7 closures will be debated for a few weeks, then become a fait accompli as the Java community shrugs its collective shoulders.</em> Frankly, I think the Java community has exhausted its interest in debating new language features for Java. Recent college grads and open-source groups with an axe to grind will continue to try and make an issue out of this, but I think the overall Java community just... doesn't... care. They just want to see JDK 7 ship someday.</li>    <li><em>... Scala either &quot;pops&quot; in 2010, or begins to fall apart.</em> By &quot;pops&quot;, I mean reaches a critical mass of developers interested in using it, enough to convince somebody to create a company around it, a la G2One.</li>    <li><em>... Oracle is going to make a serious &quot;cloud&quot; play, probably by offering an Oracle-hosted version of Azure or AppEngine.</em> Oracle loves the enterprise space too much, and derives too much money from it, to not at least appear to have some kind of offering here. Now that they own Java, they'll marry it up against OpenSolaris, the Oracle database, and throw the whole thing into a series of server centers all over the continent, and call it &quot;Oracle 12c&quot; (c for Cloud, of course) or something.</li>    <li><em>... Spring development will slow to a crawl and start to take a left turn toward cloud ideas.</em> VMWare bought SpringSource for a reason, and I believe it's entirely centered around VMWare's movement into the cloud space—they want to be more than &quot;just&quot; a virtualization tool. Spring + Groovy makes a compelling development stack, particularly if VMWare does some interesting hooks-n-hacks to make Spring a virtualization environment in its own right somehow. But from a practical perspective, any community-driven development against Spring is all but basically dead. The source may be downloadable later, like the VMWare Player code is, but making contributions back? Fuhgeddabowdit.</li>    <li><em>... the explosion of e-book readers brings the Kindle 2009 edition way down to size.</em> The era of the e-book reader is here, and honestly, while I'm glad I have a Kindle, I'm expecting that I'll be dusting it off a shelf in a few years. Kinda like I do with my iPods from a few years ago.</li>    <li><em>... &quot;social networking&quot; becomes the &quot;Web 2.0&quot; of 2010.</em> In other words, using the term will basically identify you as a tech wannabe and clearly out of touch with the bleeding edge.</li>    <li><em>... Facebook becomes a developer platform requirement.</em> I don't pretend to know anything about Facebook—I'm not even on it, which amazes my family to no end—but clearly Facebook is one of those mechanisms by which people reach each other, and before long, it'll start showing up as a developer requirement for companies looking to hire. If you're looking to build out your resume to make yourself attractive to companies in 2010, mad Facebook skillz might not be a bad investment.</li>    <li><em>... Nintendo releases an open SDK for building games for its next-gen DS-based device.</em> With the spectacular success of games on the iPhone, Nintendo clearly must see that they're missing a huge opportunity every day developers can't write games for the Nintendo DS that are easily downloadable to the device for playing. Nintendo is not stupid—if they don't open up the SDK and promote &quot;casual&quot; games like those on the iPhone and those that can now be downloaded to the Zune or the XBox, they risk being marginalized out of existence.</li> </ul>  <p>And for the next decade, I predict....</p>  <ul>   <li><em>... colleges and unversities will begin issuing e-book reader devices to students.</em> It's a helluvalot cheaper than issuing laptops or netbooks, and besides....</li>    <li><em>... netbooks and e-book readers will merge before the decade is out.</em> Let's be honest—if the e-book reader could do email and browse the web, you have almost the perfect paperback-sized mobile device. As for the credit-card sized mobile device....</li>    <li><em>... mobile phones will all but disappear as they turn into what PDAs tried to be.</em> &quot;The iPhone makes calls? Really? You mean Voice-over-IP, right? No, wait, over cell signal? It can <em>do </em>that? Wow, there's really an app for everything, isn't there?&quot;</li>    <li><em>... wireless formats will skyrocket in importance all around the office and home.</em> Combine the iPhone's Bluetooth (or something similar yet lower-power-consuming) with an equally-capable (Bluetooth or otherwise) projector, and suddenly many executives can leave their netbook or laptop at home for a business presentation. Throw in the Whispersync-aware e-book reader/netbook-thing, and now most executives have absolutely zero reason to carry anything but their e-book/netbook and their phone/PDA. The day somebody figures out an easy way to combine Bluetooth with PayPal on the iPhone or Android phone, we will have more or less made pocket change irrelevant. And believe me, that day will happen before the end of the decade.</li>    <li><em>... either Android or Windows Mobile will gain some serious market share against the iPhone the day they figure out how to support an open and unrestricted AppStore-like app acquisition model.</em> Let's be honest, the attraction of iTunes and AppStore is that I can see an &quot;Oh, cool!&quot; app on a buddy's iPhone, and have it on mine less than 30 seconds later. If Android or WinMo can figure out how to offer that same kind of experience without the draconian AppStore policies to go with it, they'll start making up lost ground on iPhone in a hurry.</li>    <li><em>... Apple becomes the DOJ target of the decade.</em> Microsoft was it in the 2000's, and Apple's stunning rising success is going to put it squarely in the sights of monopolist accusations before long. Coupled with the unfortunate health distractions that Steve Jobs has to deal with, Apple's going to get hammered pretty hard by the end of the decade, but it will have mastered enough market share and mindshare to weather it as Microsoft has.</li>    <li><em>... Google becomes the next Microsoft.</em> It won't be anything the founders do, but Google will do &quot;something evil&quot;, and it will be loudly and screechingly pointed out by all of Google's corporate opponents, and the star will have fallen.</li>    <li>... <em>Microsoft finds its way again.</em> Microsoft, as a company, has lost its way. This is a company that's not used to losing, and like Bill Belichick's Patriots, they will find ways to adapt and adjust to the changed circumstances of their position to find a way to win again. What that'll be, I have no idea, but historically, the last decade notwithstanding, betting against Microsoft has historically been a bad idea. My gut tells me they'll figure something new to get that mojo back.</li>    <li><em>... a politician will make himself or herself famous by standing up to the TSA.</em> The scene will play out like this: during a Congressional hearing on airline security, after some nut/terrorist tries to blow up another plane through nitroglycerine-soaked underwear, the TSA director will suggest all passengers should fly naked in order to preserve safety, the congressman/woman will stare open-mouthed at this suggestion, proclaim, &quot;Have you no sense of decency, sir?&quot; and immediately get a standing ovation and never have to worry about re-election again. Folks, if we want to prevent any chance of loss of life from a terrorist act on an airplane, we have to prevent passengers from getting on them. Otherwise, just accept that it might happen, do a reasonable job of preventing it from happening, and let private insurance start offering flight insurance against the possibility to reassure the paranoid.</li> </ul>  <p>See you all next year.</p>
 
