title=2023 Tech Predictions
date=2023-01-01
type=post
tags=predictions
status=published
description=Technology and related predictions for 2023.
~~~~~~

It's that time of the year again, when I make predictions for the upcoming year. As has become my tradition now for nigh-on a decade, I will first go back over last years' predictions, to see how well I called it (and keep me honest), then wax prophetic on what I think the new year has to offer us.

<!--more-->

As per previous years, I'm giving myself either a **+1** or a **-1** based on a purely subjective and highly-biased evaluational criteria as to whether it actually happened (or in some cases at least started to happen before 31 Dec 2020 ended).

By the way, as of this writing, despite multiple false starts, I'm [still looking for my next great adventure]() (ideally as an Developer Relations or Engineering leader-of-leaders), so if you find my analysis here to be interesting or intriguing--even if you disagree with it--perhaps there's a role in which I can do this kinds of strategic and executive thinking on your company's behalf? Would love to hear from you.

## In 2022...
... I wrote a lot of stuff. (That always seems to happen when I do these.) So let's get to it; as I do each year, I'll include the full text of what I wrote in each bullet point first, then put the ***Result*** after it with whatever insights or comments seem relevant. (Arguably none of them are, but hey, it's my set of predictions, so....) As always, evidence is entirely anecdotal and from my perspective, so *caveat emptor*.

The major thing that kicked off in 2022, of course, was the conflict in the Ukraine. Russia's decision to move armed troops across the Russo-Ukrainian border was really precedent-shattering on a number of fronts, and significantly shook a world order that had made the assumption that "major-power" armed conflicts were a thing of the 1900s. The "McDonald's Rule" of International Relations ("No two countries, each of which having a McDonald's within their borders, have ever gone to war against one another"), a bastion assumption of economic liberalism, has suddenly been thrown for a loop, and it leaves a lot of people wondering what to make of it. It combined with the overall economic gray doldrums that had been starting to beat its way through our consciousness to make 2022 feel pretty grim.

On the tech front, the big news in the second half of the year was the collapse of first one, then many, cryptocurrencies and exchanges, and literally billions--if not trillions--of dollars of value disappeared into the ether. Whether this will end up being the precipitating event of a Great Depression (like the 1929 Stock Market Crash) or a momentary blip on the radar of history has yet to be seen. Generally, that amount of wealth just going up in smoke has some pretty negative ramifications, but it's questionable whether that "wealth" ever actually existed. To be fair, people that paid USD (or EUR or YEN or ...) for tokens have now lost their original investment, but it seems that the original investment was much smaller than many media pundits are quoting; it's much more sensationalistic to talk about the "trillions of dollars lost" by speaking of the supposed wealth of the tokens, rather than the "millions of dollars of investment lost" from those who speculated. This one will probably take a few years to sort out before we really know what its impact was.

Meanwhile, among my predictions....

* "***5G rollout is going to be a lot more contentious than we expected.*** (Probability 0.6) 5G rollout two years ago wasn't a sure thing, but then it was because of crackpot theories about how it would affect brainwaves or somesuch nonsense. Now, the [FAA has concerns](https://www.bbc.com/news/business-60042178), and that's a helluva lot more serious. It's pretty likely that the technical issues will be addressed, but this could very well turn into the next conspiracy-theorist farmground, which in turn will create barriers and obstacles."

    **Result: -1.** 5G rollout generated a few more warnings, but for the most part, not much really kicked in. There may be more movement next year, but as a prediction, it definitely didn't generate much news, reaction, or practical issues.

* "***Demand for full-stack developers will continue to leave companies high-and-dry.*** (0.8) If this isn't alreday self-evident to you, you're clearly not in a position of trying to hire engineers these days. Big Tech companies are throwing ever-greater compensation numbers at people, driving the equilibrium price for developers up, and that's before we even consider the ever-increasing numbers of tech jobs that are outpacing the numbers of people who can fill them. If a company is expecting to grow their developer staff significantly, trying to hire "full-stack" is going to run into significant hurdles, particularly if they aren't willing to move fast, take a few risks, *and* pay handsomely."

    **Result: +1.** Yup, the demand got white-hot, all the way up until recently, when the whole "recession" thing kicked in. Even now, as layoffs are taking place, some of the very companies that laid people off are still hiring. It's the weirdest economic situation I've ever lived in, and I lived through the Stagflation and Oil Embargo of the late 70s.

    As to my predicted second-order effects from this one....:

    * "**Work-from-home will become normalized as part of the landscape.** (0.8) Talk to that one friend you have that's a classic Keynesian economist, and they'll tell you that when supply is tight and demand is high, in addition to a high equilibrium price, the market starts to see "complementary" and "supplementary" effects kicking in. In this case, those high-demand engineers are going to get their pick of the perks, and one that many of them seem to value highly is the flexibility to work from home. That in turn will create (or enhance) pressure to let everybody on the team to work remotely--or else find that you need to hire replacements to adjust for the attrition of people leaving for places who can, still, work from home."

        **Result: +1.** Yup. In fact, the "remote work" thing is now normalized in a way it wasn't before, even despite some companies (most of whom I think are trying to justify the huge investment in land and leases and office space they're still obligated to pay for) strongly trying to get people back into the office.

    * **Companies will start "growing" their own developer staff.** (0.6) It's not something that every company can do, but those that can are going to start thinking, "If I can't buy the people I need, then I'll have to grow them." Rocket Mortgage was ahead of the game on this one, having put a program in place a few years ago already that was, for all intents and purposes, a developer bootcamp for people wishing ot make a mid-career change. Not all companies will have the resources of the nation's #1 mortgage lender, but other approaches are available: partner with existing bootcamps, join a few companies together to sponsor one, hire a bunch of juniors and apprentice them to others within the company, or even do something a little more informal like a mentoring program or internal book club or something. Whatever it is, though, those companies that start thinking aggressively about growing their next generation of developers are going to see it pay off; if you take a junior or a recent bootcamp grad and invest in them, their gratitude and loyalty will more than pay off.

        **Result: 0.** Some of the bigger companies dove into this in the start of the year, but leveled off or backed away from it as the year wore on and the Gray Clouds of Recession loomed more menacingly overhead. They haven't gotten away from it entirely--and possibly never will, if they've got the infrastructure already set up and in place--but it's nowhere near as highly-established as I thought it would be.

    * **Automation tools and platforms will climb in use.** (0.7) The more work we can pull off the senior full-stack developer, the more work they can get done that can't be automated. As a result, managers and execs are going to start looking for tools and platforms that can automate all the things--well beyond the whole "DevOps" suite of things. Workflows, processes, emails, the whole enchilda, it's all going to be "on the table" for anyone or anything that can cut the developer load down. This would be a good year to have an automation startup going.

        By the way, corollary to this: Tools to automate the use of online services--and the rampant abuse and fraud using those tools--will also climb through the roof. If you offer a website or an API (and who doesn't?!?), spend some time in 2022 figuring out how people can abuse your system. (If your answer is a confident, "They can't!", you didn't think hard enough. If your answer is a confident, "They wouldn't!" then your business is clearly not diverse or interesting enough.)

        **Result: +1.** I'll give myself a point here, but let me be clear: There is *no way* I was thinking anything along the lines of ChatGPT or OpenAI or any of that stuff. 

    * **No-code/low-code tools and platforms will surge.** (0.7) Same song, different verse: low supply plus high demand equals high equilibrium price for that good/service, and supplementary (replacement) options will begin to become more attractive. For the developer ecosystem, that's low-code/no-code tools and platforms. I expect there will be a ton of chaos and movement in this space, and probably by 2023 or 2024 these platforms will start to diversify as their various features commodotize. But that'll take a while--for now, we're just going to see a sharp rise in the use of these tools, mostly by companies that have never considered themselves "tech" companies. (And if you're a consulting provider to these sorts of firms, you might want to think about how to tap into this world--and not just by selling services on top of somebody else's low-code/no-code platform, because those vendors are going to be pushing the barrier-to-entry for use of their platform as low as they can reasonably get it--which means now you're just selling labor, not expertise.)

        **Result: +1.** Do a Google search on either "low-code" or "no-code" and then take a step back as the results flood your machine. Layoffs have hit some of the big players in this space (Airtable, for example), but it's early enough for some of them that they're just charging forward damn-the-torpedoes-style.

    * **Developer market will grow. Slowly.** (0.7) The other thing that a high equilibrium price does? Attract more players to it.

        **Result: +1.** Lots of people are posting to LinkedIN and other places about joining the tech field, and the bootcamps and self-study programs continue to grow ([Pluralsight's 20% layoff](https://www.sltrib.com/news/2022/12/12/utah-tech-layoffs-continue-yet/) notwithstanding).

    * **Job descriptions will emphasize more about skills (including human skills) and less on degrees/certifications.** (0.8) One interesting corollary to the tight-labor-market perspective is that companies who are finding it hard to hire are going to start paying closer attention to their job descriptions and tune them more effectively to attract talent. Five years ago, "5 years Java" wouldn't have been really a great match against a senior C# development position; today, that'll totally work, if the candidate is down to learn C#. So let's not call it "5 years Java", let's call it "Comfortable with an O-O enterprise language". ... Smart companies are also going to zoom in on their interview pipelines and look for ways to trim costs, as well as look at the overall efficiency of their interview pipeline to make sure their recruiting team is giving them the biggest bang-for-recruiting-buck. 

        **Result: 0.** Well, on the one hand, (some) companies did revise their job descriptions to be a little more "growth mindset"-focused, but the interview processes didn't exactly shorten up--if anything, as the economy started to get more bleak, interview processes stretched out. (The cynic in me wants to point out that stretching out the interview process is a great way to see if the company is going to lay off; if we don't hire them, this is one person they don't have to lay off.) If companies are putting any sort of metrics on their interview pipelines, it's not many companies doing it, and their metrics aren't reaching the folks responsible for refactoring the process, it seems.

* ***Remote tooling vendors will look to improve.*** (0.6) Teams, Zoom, WebEx, they all have one thing in common: We routinely lament the fact that "they all suck". (Anecdotally, which one you think sucks the most appears to be directly proportional to the amount of time you use it.) The fact that we can do this sort of virtual meeting *at all* is a pretty amazing thing (on the same order of, ["It's a chair, *in the sky*!"](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oTcAWN5R5-I), if you ask me), but there's still some things that the meeting tools don't really handle well (shared whiteboarding/doodling, for example, which is really important to technical conversations). The various players are now well-established--so long as we have hybrid WFA/WFO in place, these tools will be a part of our lives--so now they need to start figuring out how to differentiate from one another. (Which will commodotize over time, and arguably already has, but that's another analysis for another day.)

    **Result: +1.** All of them rolled out various features, and just about every IDE now has some kind of "remote connect" feature allowing developers to pair- or "mob"-program together remotely. We can argue about the efficacy or efficiency of doing so, but the tools vendors definitely saw the writing on the wall and responded.

* ***"Older" tech will start to see a surge of interest and rise in adoption.*** (0.6) This isn't a knock on the "older generation", per se, (particularly because I'm on the cusp of being a part of it), but the rise of complexity around all these tools and platforms and applications is just getting to the point that it's becoming a mess to keep track of anything. Case in point: How many streaming services are there? How many of us have different streaming services that go to particular devices and aren't available on other devices? (Or they could, IF we spent the time to configure something correctly. Maybe.) There's only so much complexity people can handle in their lives, and they're going to start looking for ways to claw some of that cognitive budget back by simplifying by going back to simpler tools.

    **Result: 0.** It's not widespread yet, but... check it out: [a startup around hand-curating news sent to you over text message](https://thenewpaper.co/). If that's not a direct appeal to "let's simplify all this, shall we?"--and a direct rejection of AI-curated social media feeds masquerading as news--I don't know what it is.

* ***Theranos will teach us something... but we'll not be sure exactly what.*** (0.5) The story of Theranos may have sent some ripples through the Silicon Valley around overhyped technology and throwing huge amounts of cash into hot startups, but the lessons to be learned from the whole thing are less clear. Don't invest in wild promises? Dude, that's what the VC funds are *built* to do. Don't fall for first-time founders' claims of what they can make happen? The VC funds are often made up of money from first-time founders who are convinced their success has everything to do with their "methodology" and little-to-nothing to do with luck. Theranos represents everything that's wrong with the startup community... but we aren't sure what that means. Much will be written, little will be done, and we'll be having this conversation again in a few years around a different startup, because the Valley would rather lose billions than learn a lesson.

    **Result: +1.** Elizabeth Holmes got 10 years (appeals pending). Her partner got 13 (again, appeals pending). Clearly "the system" wanted to send a message about fraudulent claims around startups, but overall, the reaction in the startup world has been... mixed. There's still the incessant hype around Miracle Founders (I mean, how much more smoke do we need to blow up Elon's ass already?), and much is being written, even as little is being done. Hate to give myself a point for being right about no progress, but here we are.

* ***NFTs, crypto; corporate promotion of NFTs followed by a huge backlash/abandonment.*** (0.6) In the words of several of my schoolmates growing up, "ERmigawd, how GRODY". Blockchain/crypto-based tech systems aren't even trying to make sense anymore, they're just throwing big words at investment funds and relying on the opacity of the words to convince people they're the next hot investment. NFTs are just the latest in the Ponzi pyramid--you get to own a certificate that declares nothing more than the fact that you own a certificate. (No, you don't own the image, or the original, you literally just own the certificate; see ["NFTs are like those old 'star registry' scams"](https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=29290841) for an apt example and corresponding debate.) Big companies--Twitter, for example--are starting to get into the NFT thing, but let's be honest, many of them have money to burn, and throwing a billion USD into this, against a 1% chance of it actually being something beyond just a huge pit into which you toss money, is actually a reasonable move. But average folks buying the NFTs are going to figure out the scam fairly quick, and those celebrity buyers even quicker, and that's going to create a backlash and a hue-and-cry for regulation, and people will scurry out of them almost as fast as they scurried into them.

    Or not--some of those star registries are still operating to this day, so... *shrug*

    **Result: +1.** I kinda want to give myself more than one point for this one, given how the whole thing collapsed in spectacular fashion. I mean... on the one hand, yay me for getting this one right, but on the other hand... yikes. People lost their entire life's savings out of this mess.

* ***More non-developer-sales companies will build Developer Relations teams.*** (0.7) This is one of my happier predictions, in that it's one of my predictions that would make me happy if it comes true. :-) Developer Relations used to be "technical sales" to developers, something that Microsoft and Google and Amazon and other companies-who-sell-tech-to-development-departments would create and support, in order to have folks who knew how to talk to their principal customers--developers--about the things companies wanted to sell. But over the past decade, the definition of "developer relations" is shifting, becoming less sales/marketing-to-developers, and more "connecting technologists--both internal and external to the company--to their corresponding communities".

    **Result: +1.** DevRel is a *hot* commodity among companies right now, even despite the layoffs. Lots of companies are looking for "Head of DevRel" candidates, signaling a desire for a "DevRel IC who can later build out the rest of the DevRel team (in a few years, when we're sure this DevRel thing is going to stick....)".

* ***Open-source backlash/flight/pressure grows.*** (0.7) One of the sadder things we witnessed in 2021 was the log4j security vulnerability debacle. I call it a debacle not because I blame the log4j team for having that feature in the library (although, honestly, I have long believed that diagnostic logs are way over-engineered for the problem they need to solve), but because companies' worst tendencies around open-source software came to full flower and fruition, and made it very clear that the FOSS ecosystem is inherently unsustainable in its current form.

    **Result: 0.** There've been a few OSS packages that went the way of the Dodo bird, but for the most part, 

* "***New programming languages are going to start the R&D cycle on languages again.*** (0.6) They may be "service-oriented", they may be something else, but languages like [Ballerina](http://ballerina.io), [Jolie](https://www.jolie-lang.org/), and [Dark](https://darklang.com/) are basically suggesting that there's a new level of abstraction to be sought as a linguistic first-class citizen. Frankly, if you've been doing any sort of service development (micro- or otherwise), you've felt the costs and pain (in terms of complexity and the number of moving parts you have to track) of doing so. Cloud vendors are trying to suggest that "serverless" is the way to go, but in a lot of ways it just trades the complexity off to other ares of the app; a new paradigm is what's needed, to bring the complexities back down to human-manageable levels."

    **Result: +1.** Hello, Carbon. Hello, Cadl. Inform7 was open-sourced (April 2022). I can feel the steam building around languages, and I don't see it going away--in fact, I think it'll get even stronger.

* "***Some company is going to be really happy they took me up on that hypothetical in the second paragraph.*** (0.8) The one about contacting me about figuring out a leadership role within the company. I build some strong teams that can do some really interesting things...."

    **Result: -1.** :-( I was really hoping this was the one that *wouldn't* turn out to be a -1. Technically, I suppose I could call it a 0 since there've been a few places that would've liked to but couldn't, and a few that had their assumptions yanked out from underneath them so they couldn't, but at the end of the day, they didn't. Bummer, dude.


In summary:

* sixteen predictions,
* four 0s,
* and two -1s

... leaving me with ten +1s, or something around 60%. Above average this go-round, it seems.

# 2023 Predictions
With that settled up, let's take a look at what I think will happen across calendar year 2023.

First off, the pandemic hasn't left us, and CDC is starting to talk about masking up again. Despite desperate efforts to pretend we're clear of COVID (and related viruses), we're not, and it's going to continue to rear its head in ugly ways going forward. I don't think we're going back to mandatory stay-at-home policies, mind you, but it's going to be a couple of years of really bad winters, medically speaking. The "taper down" I talked about last year definitely seems to be in full swing (or slope, as the case may be).

Specifically, though, I think 2022 will show us the following:

* ***Point.*** (Probability 0.6) text....

* ***Work-From-Home (WFH) continues to normalize and become "just another location".*** (Probability 0.7) text....

* ***Entry-level positions are going to be easier to come by.*** (Probability 0.5) When the market gets soft like this one appears to be, companies often start looking for ways to do take smaller risk in their hiring by hiring people newer to the workforce--a la junior and associate developers (and their kin), who they can hire at half of the cost of a senior software developer, thus risking less against their budget in the event the hire doesn't work out. (It doesn't mean companies will make it any easier for those early-stage developers to get hired, though, because they'll still be trying to put candidates through seventeen rounds of interviews over a six-month period before offering...)

* ***Low-code/no-code is going to accelerage further.*** (Probability 0.7) With an economic contraction of any form, getting your Amazing Innovation Project(tm) funded so you can hire software developers to build it will be that much harder. You'll start looking for ways around that obstacle, and as a result, interest in low-code/no-code tools will really begin to accelerate even further. Additional prediction: In 2025, interest in integrating those low-code/no-code solutions into the larger fabric of the company's IT will skyrocket.

* ***Internal tech audits will become relatively popular.*** (Probability 0.4) During times like this, when we're not quite so "move fast and break things", we have a tendency to slump in the chair and look around the room at the collateral damage that the previous "go-go-go" era caused. At a company level, that means starting to take some deep audits of what we have, and some efforts to "clean house" will result. External purchases will be paused while execs look to integrate existing things rather than building new things. Regardless of what comes out of the analysis, it starts with the IT audit, though, and as a result, it's likely to be a pretty high-priority project on everybody's road map for 2023.

* ***Muskian-style management will be studied, cargo-culted, and lead to the failure of more than one company.*** (Probability 0.6) Love him or hate him, Elon Musk has propelled himself into the center of all things "management academia" with his handling of the Twitter purchase and takeover. Personally, I think he's flailing and thrashing and in general way out of his depth, but one thing is for sure: His rampant (and some suggest ill-advised) decisions about Return-To-Office and refusal to honor certain debts (like employee severances and expenses) are being watched very carefully by other CEOs around the industry, some of whom already are signaling that they're thinking about following suit.

    At the *very least*, there's going to be a book or two that will be published on all this, probably due to hit shelves somewhere at the end of the calendar year, and it will garner all sorts of reviews from established periodicals. Some will be critical of Elon's approach, some will seek to find some sort of "underlying meaning" behind his actions that we can carry away insights from, but all will be looking, pointing, whispering, and taking notes.

* ***2023 will be the year we try to figure out what to do with all this AI stuff.*** (Probability 0.8) ChatGPT and OpenAI have completely taken the media and social media world by storm, but it isn't clear yet how any of that actually *helps*. Like most applications of AI, it will likely be a mix of human creativity and AI computing power, but *how*? That's what we'll spend 2023 trying to figure out.

* ***Companies will accelerate their drive to become 'tech companies'.*** (Probability 0.6) For quite a few years now, there's been a drive among a number of firms to be seen as a "tech company", with all the perks and benefits of being one, but with many (if not most) of the companies seeking to make this transformation unsure of what that exactly means. Particularly with the projected "soft" IT market next year to start, it will be a good time to take a moment to take stock, reshape the thought process, and then jump into it, particularly because...

* ***Hiring will accelerate at the end of 1Q2023.*** (Probability 0.8) Even as companies are engaging in layoffs, these aren't the savage cuts that we saw back in the Dot-Bomb era (circa 2001) or the Great Recession (circa 2008) era. Both of those were about the industry figuring out that whole lines of business were suddenly seen for what they were (unprofitable--Pets.com, anyone?) and making some fundamental adjustments to our thinking. This time around feels more like a "correction", more of a "We know there's something in this line of business, but we didn't quite nail it and we need to re-examine and re-allocate". People I've talked to at both Microsoft and Amazon feel like as soon as this "organizational refactoring" is finished (which shouldn't take too long after the holidays), things will start to spin back up again.

* ***Platform-oriented development is going to begin making some waves.*** (Probability 0.6) As companies start looking for ways to create new revenue opportunities for themselves, or at making the transition into becoming a "tech company", they're going to start looking very hard (once again) at how to build platforms out of their business, and the software they seek to build will follow suit--in other words, developers will be asked to build platforms rather than just hooking into one. 

    In fact, there is a reasonable chance (and maybe this is more of a 2024 thing) that libraries/frameworks/languages will emerge to make it easier to integrate two platforms together more seamlessly and easily, rather than the current crop of tools designed to consume a platform's offering.

* ***Cloud will begin to shift.*** (Probability 0.5) TikTok is now an enemy of the US state, because it appears to be a tool of the Chinese state. Russian hackers and bots are shadowy figures looking to destabilize just about anything they can in the West, or so the pundits would have us believe (and which is probably at least partly true). And massive data breaches continue to plague comapnies left and right ([lookin' at you, Twitter....](https://firewalltimes.com/twitter-data-breach-timeline/)). Cloud is not responsible for these things, and in many cases will be a powerful tool to fight against them, but the US government is signaling that it is going to start cracking down on some aspects of how the virtual world operates--and that could mean some guidance and/or restrictions around where data gets to live and where it gets to be processed. Even before the Feds tell CEOs where to put it, though, CEOs are going to start asking themselves the same questions, and this will lead to some "reallocation" of assets in and around various clouds. It's not likely cloud usage will shrink, but *how* we use cloud and *where* the cloud servers that we use are located will become more important.

* ***BOLD TWITTER TAKE: Elon will sell Twitter (perhaps involuntarily) at the end of 2023, to another tech firm (like Microsoft or Oracle).*** (Probability 0.6) The current model is unsustainable. Twitter has no source of income: advertisers are bailing, and his "verified checkmarks" income is nowhere close to what he needs to keep things going even under the new staffing levels. (And let's just leave aside the existing debts and/or expenses from the pending lawsuits that are likely to slam into him in 2023--I'm sure he can get Tesla or SpaceX to cover those, no matter how illegal that may be....) Twitter's losing people in droves, there's no new signups to replace the losses, and it's now become clear that where Twitter might have had a "cultural monopoly" on the idea of "short-form mass-widespread posting" (as opposed to some of the other forms of social media), that monopoly has now been shattered as non-technical folks start to pick up on terms like "Mastodon" and "Post". Twitter needs users, and users are very quickly learning they don't need Twitter. Without stable leadership and a massive infusion of cash, the platform will plunge in value until one of the other tech giants just shrugs and says, "We can pick it up out of petty cash--how can we *not* buy it now?"

    And that's how the grand MuskTwitter experiment will end. Not with a bang, but with a pathetic whimper.

Talk to you all next year... if not sooner.
