+++
date = "2007-04-10T17:16:49.4393376-07:00"
draft = false
title = "Management Lessons for Developers"
aliases = [
	"/2007/04/11/Management+Lessons+For+Developers.aspx"
]
categories = [
	
]
concepts = []
languages = []
platforms = []
 
+++
<font size="2"> <p>Others may say that developers can't be managers, but I fail to accept that; I just think developers need to get the basics about management in short, easy-to-remember doses. With that, I now offer the "Five-Minute Manager":</p> <h4>Lesson #1: Communication</h4> <p>A man is getting into the shower just as his wife is finishing up her shower, when the doorbell rings. The wife quickly wraps herself in a towel and runs downstairs. When she opens the door, there stands Bob, the next-door neighbor. </p> <p>Before she says a word, Bob says, "I'll give you $800 to drop that towel."</p> <p>After thinking for a moment, the woman drops her towel and stands naked in front of Bob. After a few seconds, Bob hands her $800 and leaves.</p> <p>The woman wraps back up in the towel and goes back upstairs. When she gets to the bathroom, her husband asks, "Who was that?"</p> <p>"It was Bob the next door neighbor," she replies.</p> <p>"Great," the husband says, "did he say anything about the $800 he owes me?" </p> <p><strong>Moral: I</strong>f you share critical information with your&nbsp;coworkers and employees&nbsp;in a timely fashion, you may be in a position to prevent avoidable exposure.</p> <p>&nbsp;</p> <h4>Lesson #2: Knowledge</h4> <p>A priest offered a Nun a lift. She got in and crossed her legs, forcing her gown to reveal a leg. The priest nearly had an accident. After controlling the car, he stealthily slid his hand up her leg.</p> <p>The nun said, "Father, remember Psalm 129?" </p> <p>The priest removed his hand. But, changing gears, he let his hand slide up her leg again. </p> <p>The nun once again said, "Father, remember Psalm 129?"</p> <p>The priest apologized "Sorry, sister, but the flesh is weak."</p> <p>Arriving at the convent, the nun sighed heavily and went on her way. </p> <p>On his arrival at the church, the priest rushed to look up Psalm 129. It said, "Go forth and seek, further up you will find glory."</p> <p><strong>Moral: </strong>If you are not well informed, you might miss a great opportunity.</p> <p>&nbsp;</p> <h4>Lesson #3: Politics</h4> <p>A sales rep, an administration clerk, and the manager are walking to lunch when they find an antique oil lamp. They rub it and a Genie comes out and says, "I'll give each of you just one wish."</p> <p></p> <p>"Me first! Me first!" says the admin clerk. "I want to be in the Bahamas, driving a speedboat, without a care in the world."</p> <p>Puff! She's gone. </p> <p>"Me next! Me next!" says the sales rep. "I want to be in Hawaii, relaxing on the beach with my personal masseuse, an endless supply of Pina Coladas and the love of my life." </p> <p>Puff! He's gone.</p> <p>"OK, you're up," the Genie says to the manager. </p> <p>The manager says, "I want those two back in the office after lunch."</p> <p><strong>Moral:</strong> Always let your boss&nbsp;(or your customer) have the first say.</p> <p>&nbsp;</p> <h4>Lesson #4: Relativity</h4> <p>An eagle was sitting on a tree, resting, doing nothing. A small rabbit saw the eagle and asked him, "Can I also sit like you and do nothing?"</p> <p>The eagle answered: "Sure, why not."</p> <p>So, the rabbit sat on the ground below the eagle and rested.</p> <p>All of a sudden, a fox appeared, jumped on the rabbit and ate it. </p> <p><strong>Moral:</strong> To be sitting and doing nothing, you must be sitting very, very high up.</p> <p>&nbsp;</p> <h4>Lesson #5: Sincerity</h4> <p>A turkey was chatting with a bull. "I would love to be able to get to the top of that tree," sighed the turkey, "but I haven't got the energy."</p> <p>"Well, why don't you nibble on some of my droppings?", replied the bull. "They're packed with nutrients."</p> <p>The turkey pecked at a lump of dung, and found it actually gave him enough strength to reach the lowest branch of the tree. The next day, after eating some more dung, he reached the second branch. Finally after a fourth night, the turkey was proudly perched at the top of the tree. </p> <p>He was promptly spotted by a farmer, who shot him out of the tree.</p> <p><strong>Moral:</strong>&nbsp;BS might get you to the top, but it won't keep you there.</p> <p>&nbsp;</p> <p>... and if you really thought you could learn to be a manager in five minutes, allow me to suggest that you take my course, "How to Bilk Management of Loads of Cash, the Easy Way", only $5995 for five days....</p></font>
 
